The ATLAS Collaboration has released its first open data of heavy-ion
collisions for research purposes. This dataset features lead-ion (Pb-Pb)
collisions at an energy of 5 TeV per nucleon pair, recorded in 2015 as part of
the Large Hadron Collider’s second operation period (LHC Run 2). Today’s
release is the highest energy heavy-ion collision data ever made publicly
available and the first LHC Run 2 heavy-ion open dataset. Researchers worldwide
can now explore over four terabytes of open data – comprising 221 million
collision events – unlocking new opportunities for scientific discussions.

<p align="center">
  <img src="/static/docs/atlas-heavy-ion-open-data-for-research-release-2024/ATLAS-HeavyIon-Events.jpg" width="60%" alt="ATLAS heavy ion events">
  <br/><em>Two heavy-ion collision events from the new ATLAS Open dataset, occurring in close succession.</em>
  <br/><em>On the left, a head-on collision of lead ions; on the right, a peripheral interaction where the ions glanced off each other.</em>
</p>

Heavy-ion collisions, such as those between lead nuclei, are markedly different
from proton-proton collisions. “Their massive size leads to very different
types of interactions,” says Zach Marshall of the ATLAS Open Data team. “While
colliding protons is akin to smashing two garbage cans together, colliding lead
ions is what happens when you drive two garbage trucks at each other.”

Unlike colliding trucks, when lead ions smash together they can create a
droplet of quark-gluon plasma (QGP). This is the state of matter believed to
have existed in the early universe, shortly after the Big Bang. As this droplet
of plasma cools and evaporates, it leaves behind a distinct energy signature in
the ATLAS experiment that researchers can analyse.

“Using the new open dataset,” continues Zach, “researchers can study these
energy signatures to learn how the QGP forms and evaporates, as well as the
intricate dynamics of particle interactions within this extreme environment.”
In particular, this dataset offers the opportunity to study jet suppression, a
phenomenon where high-energy particle jets lose energy as they pass through the
QGP. Such suppression provides researchers with a window into the properties of
the quark-gluon plasma.

Releasing heavy-ion open data posed unique challenges for the ATLAS Open Data
team. “Unlike proton-proton data, we needed to include lots of extra collision
event information – from charged particle tracks to energy measurements in our
far-forward detectors – as that is where details about the QGP’s behaviour are
hidden,” explains Zach. “To achieve this, we developed a new open data format
(DAOD_HION14), which includes all this information but can also be studied with
the same tools as our proton-proton datasets.”

Today’s release features “Minimum Bias” heavy-ion data, which includes a wide
range of collision events from central, head-on collisions to glancing,
ultra-peripheral interactions. Next year, ATLAS will release “Hard Probes”
heavy-ion data collected in 2015, focusing on collision events triggered by
high-energy particles such as Z bosons or top-quark pairs. To help researchers
understand the unique characteristics of each open dataset, the release is also
accompanied by documentation and simulated data.

Earlier this year, ATLAS made public over 65 TB of proton-proton collisions in
its first open dataset for research. Today’s release adds to this legacy,
comprising approximately 20% of ATLAS’ total Pb-Pb dataset, and more releases
are already in the pipeline. This commitment to openness reflects core values
of the high-energy physics community: fostering accessibility, enhancing
reproducibility, and driving scientific progress.

As ATLAS continues to make its data publicly available, the potential for
collaboration grows. Researchers worldwide are invited to explore this new
dataset and join the exploration of the universe’s most extreme conditions.

---

_Are you a non-ATLAS researcher looking to collaborate with ATLAS? Get access to the most recent ATLAS data by becoming a short-term associate. [Click here to learn more](https://atlas.cern/Discover/Collaboration/External-Collaboration)._

---

## Find out more

- [The ATLAS News Release](https://atlas.cern/Updates/News/Heavy-Ion-Open-Data)
- [Access the New Heavy-Ion ATLAS Open Data](https://opendata.cern.ch/record/80035)
- [Explore the ATLAS Open Data Portal](https://opendata.atlas.cern/)
- [CERN Open Data Portal](https://opendata.cern/)
